Homework 2
We consider an environment with N crickets and M parasites. 
The parasites can destroy a part of the crickets eggs only if
the life cycle of the crickets starts at the same time with 
the life cycle of the parasites (this situation is called 'the
meeting of the crickets with the parasites').
In this case, z% of the crickets eggs are destroyed. 
Note that the parasites can lay eggs only if they meet cricket eggs.

We denote by 'cvi_c' the initial life cycle of the crickets and with
'cvi_p' the initial life cycle of the parasites. 
The two values are expressed in years (for example, cvi_c = 5, cvi_p = 2).

At the beginning of each life cycle (of the crickets)
the number of crickets is increased with val_c% crickets
(than in the previous generation).

At the beginning of each life cycle (of the parasites)
the number of parasites is increased with val_p% parasites
 (than in the previous generation).

After they lay eggs, both the crickets and the parasites
(from the previous generation) die.
Cricket mutations (only when they meet the parasites):

- xc% increase their life cycle with 1 year

- yc% keep the same life cycle

(100 - xc% - yc%) decrease their life cycle with 1 year

Parasites mutations (only when they don't meet the crickets):

- xp% increase their life cycle with 1 year

- yp% keep the same life cycle

- (100 - xp% - yp%) decrease their life cycle with 1 year

If a population of parasites doesn't meet crickets for nc life cycles,
then that  population disappears.
We consider that if a population of parasites doesn't meet
crickets at the end of its life cycle, then the parasites 
live one more life cycle and then they try again to lay eggs.
This continuation of the life of the parasites cannot exceed nc life cycles.

Create a simulation program (only one thread) for this environment.

The program must run until one of the following condition is accomplished:
- the crickets disappear
- the parasites disappear
- if the simulation takes too long, a maximum number of steps might be the stopping condition

The simulation results should be the final life cycles of the
insects that are still alive (crickets or parasites, respectively) and the moment when the other species disappears.  

For better analyzing the environment, it is recommended that the
simulation program also display some intermediate results
related with the evolution of the two types of populations.