Consider an environment with N economic agents (N >= 20) that make the 
same product.

Parameters for an agent are: initial sum of money, money spent for 
advertising, quality of the advertising, the number of products for
which the agent has the profit equal to 0.

Global parameters:

1) the number of products requested by the market;

2) the minimum number of products that must be made by 
an agent in order to remain in the market in the following year
(this works even if the agent has negative profit in the current year) = nMin.

Remarks:

1) an agent can have negative profit for a given period of 
time if it can afford to maintain the production of nMin products in each
year of that period;

2) if an agent produces, in the current year, a number of products 
lower than nMin, then that agent disappears from the market starting
with the following year;

3) we consider that all the agents make their products with the 
same quality (not necessarily with the same cost);

4) when choosing the seller agent, the clients analyze: the 
price of the product, the quality of the advertising. Here, you must find a 
formula (price of the product, quality of the advertising) that will be used
by the buyers. We consider that the buyers are replaced by a single big
buyer that wants to buy all the products "requested by the market". 
This big buyer chooses the seller agents based on the previous discussed formula.

5) periodically, the number of products requested by the market modifies;

6) you can add new parameters in the system, but you must motivate 
ther necessity.

Homework requirements:

The homework asks to simulate the evolution of the economic environment for 
a given number of years. In the end, you must observe to which of the 
following states corresponds the final state of the environment:

1. monopoly (n = 1);

2. duopoly (n = 2);

3. oligopoly (n = 3 ... 5);

4. balanced economy (n >= 6),

where n is the final number of agents in the environment.

I recommend the use of 3-4 profiles of agents (ex: look for risk, 
avoid risks, balanced, ...). Also, for each profile, you must have 
approximately the same number of agents. In the end, a conclusion 
about the best profile must be obtained.

Last modified: Friday, 24 October 2014, 8:37 PM